Spde13.txt
==========

Exported: March 05, 2026

----------------------------------------

SUMMARY

This transcript captures a technical lecture that transitions from administrative seminar planning into a sophisticated discussion of **Stochastic Partial Differential Equations (SPDEs)** and **Rough Path Theory**. The speaker explains a **mild approach** to solving SPDEs by decomposing solutions into a standard path and a **stochastic convolution**, specifically addressing the difficulty of defining integrals when dealing with the low regularity of **Brownian motion**. To overcome these analytical hurdles, the instructor introduces **Rough Path Theory**, which utilizes **Taylor expansions** and **iterated integrals** to achieve convergence in Riemann sums even when paths are not differentiable. By applying this functional analytic framework and **Kolmogorov’s continuity theorem**, the lecture demonstrates how to establish the **spatial regularity** and pathwise existence of solutions for complex stochastic systems. The session concludes by connecting these abstract concepts to practical **filtering theory**, illustrating how SPDEs like the **Kushner equation** are used in real-time engineering applications such as satellite tracking and signal processing.

Keywords: Stochastic PDE solutions, Rough path theory, Stationary Gaussian processes, Covariance operator kernels, Nonlinear filtering theory

CONTENT

... ... ... So, one of the two, I think half-time, I think half-time, I think half-time, I think half-time, and half-time, I don't know, and the other alternative would be the later term, the 26th, 3rd or Monday, 4th. Yeah, it's a bit unschön, but there is a little bit of a big deal. So, let's move on with first. Also, wer in the first term will sozusagen den hier? Keine Ahnung, null. Den hier? Okay, then we're den hier. So, dann ist der gestrichen. Von dem zweiten Termin, wer will den hier? Einer. Und den da? Okay, dann nehmen wir den hier, dann ist der gestrichen. Okay. So, dann will ich jetzt folgendes machen. Ich schreibe da jetzt einfach zwei Termine drauf. Und das ist jetzt keine verbindliche Prüfungsanmeldung, das ist schon klar. Also, das eine ist Donnerstag, 19.2. Und dann eben diejenigen, die den Termin wahrnehmen wollen, Name und E-Mail-Adresse. Das andere ist Donnerstag. Dann fahren wir das gegebenenfalls noch ändern. Ja, aber nur zwischen den beiden Terminen, ne? Ja, ne? Okay. So, dann, ähm, eine Sache, ähm, der Seminar, wir fangen jetzt an, aber wir setzen mal ein Check dann. Wir fangen dann an, am Dienstag dann, äh, Freitag, äh, 13, jetzt gut ist es, glaube ich, ne? Okay. Morgens um 10 Uhr, da würde dann also, genau, Herr Becker anfangen. Wie ist das mit Ihnen, Herr Cholari? Können Sie, äh, dann auch vormittags schon teilnehmen? Ja. Okay, das heißt, Sie könnten dann sozusagen direkt danach, ähm, sie hätten nämlich den nächsten Vortrag. Alles gut? Ja? Okay, geht? Gut, der Raum ist, ähm, MAA 742, wir sind die ganze Zeit an dem MAA 742, und wir werden das dann so machen, dass wir dann nach Ihrem Vortrag schon eine Pause machen, dann machen wir weiter mit Ihren beiden Vorträgen und, ähm, der war denn dann noch, äh, der macht den letzten Vortrag, der ist, glaube ich, nicht hier. Okay. Also, es ist, ähm, zweiter Vortrag Seminar, Season Finale, ähm, das ist also der Freitag, also steht auf jeden Fall auf der ISIS-Seite, ähm, ich glaube, das ist der 13.2., ab 10 Uhr bis möglicherweise noch zu kommen, und das ist dann MAA 742, also das ist der 13.5, nein, so. Auf jeden Fall irgendwo hier oben. Okay. No white of mine? By the way, is somebody still, uh, here in the street, sorry, or does anybody understand German? I can't. You cannot. Yeah, I can, I can, I can, but, yeah. I should, I should proceed in there. Yes. Okay, please. Right, okay, um, so I was talking about the, the, um, some kind of Rock-Pack approach, uh, to this, um, to this SPDE, um, uh, so the SPDE looked like this, uh, so we consider the function operator of U, and then we have, um, this guy, and sigma BWT, so this was equation one. Um, and, um, so as in, let's say, following the mild approach, uh, we decompose the solution. Um, right, maybe I should also, um, fix some further notations of ET with the semi-group of the Laplacian, with very, very boundary conditions, by the way, so I should also mention that this equation is considered on W2, um, in one dimension on the interval from 0 to 2 pi, 2 pi in order to do any, um, additional, um, scaling of it to the Laplacian. And so the harmonic function, the trigonometric functions are exactly those eigenfunctions. Um, so that was that. I was talking about the difficulty of the, um, um, proper, um, definition of the solution. So as usual, following the mild approach, we decompose this guy into, we write this guy as, um, V plus, um, stochastic, uh, convolution. Now, this is a little bit unfortunate notation, but, okay, sorry, we'll keep this now, because later on we will also differentiate this guy with the gluospatial variable, but this has nothing to do with this one. But, okay, so, um, so this is the convolution, um, of, uh, this Wiener process with the Brownian semigroup. So maybe I should mention, so this is with periodic boundary condition. Um, and this one is then the integral of the object T into the property minus S times the flusciousness of the same group convoluted with this spacetime right now. So this is the spacetime right now. So then it could be a process on L2D0. Okay. So that's the setting. Okay. And I've already discussed a problem that this stochastic convolution takes only values in the sublap space of order h alpha and spare integral for alpha less than one-half. If you remember. And, uh, that's, um, sharp result. So I think that we can apply, um, the derivative which we should be able if we, um, perform certain integration by parts here in the, uh, integral equation satisfied by VT. So maybe I should also recall this integral equation satisfied by VT is just, yeah, the semigroup described with the initial condition. Okay. And then, uh, as usual, so this will be, as you will remember, from, um, the mild approach to SPTEs will be, um, a random PD. So there will be no stochastic integral involved. But, of course, the difficulty here is, yeah, and then, um, also use a small PT for the kernel, which belongs to the semigroup. I've already discussed this last week, so I'm going to do a little bit like that. Um, so this is now, um, yeah, f of unit s, so that's fine, plus V of unit s times the derivative of the spatial derivative of V. And then I'll add the same group in s, so that's the easy part. And the nasty part is the next one, which comes from, um, the spatial derivative of the remaining part of the decomposition. So, um, is applied to the stochastic convolution in this decomposition, right? So this would be, then, um, PT minus s. Maybe I read this, um, slightly differently than, um, last week. So then I'm going to add V of U of S. And then I have to apply the spatial derivative to the remaining part of the decomposition. On that, it's unfortunate. Um, maybe I forgot the sigma here. I'm not quite sure. Or is the sigma in the scene? No. So I did, I think there is some sigma in the scene. Sigma is a scalar, I think, at the moment. I'm not quite sure, but, okay, let's think it's a scalar. So then this is the spatial derivative with respect to the statistical s. And this, of course, doesn't make sense, right? Um, but, the name, the name of the game is, to spell this out, so this is a kernel, so I can, so, write it as a spatial integral from 0.1 to 2.5, state space, write a kernel corresponding to the semi-group. Now, then I integrate against this. So we have this additional integral here. And, um, well, what we are doing now is just to reinterpret this as an integral, a rough integral, but not with respect to time, but now with respect to the spatial variable y. Okay, so that's the, that's what we want to do. Okay, so that's the main idea. So basically, um, right, so I explained, um, why this is reasonable. I don't know. We don't know about that. Okay, okay, so this is where we are. Um, something to talk about what path, um, because it is not necessary, um, in a manner to, um, to use some terminology that we have. So let's assume x y is a continuous path, um, Assume xy is a continuous path. And Hrda, Hrda between one third and one half. One half you might understand, so because the typical path of Brownian motion in a process, something like this, should have exactly this c-alpha regularity, alpha less than one half, for any alpha less than one half. So this we know. Why we assume that alpha is larger than one third, we'll see in a minute. Okay, so it can relax this, but then it becomes even more, let's see. So let's use this one for this assumption. Okay. Now, so we want to define integrals of this type, something like this, ys dxs, right? So we want to integrate this. And we want to define this in terms of Riemann sums. So we want to take this as a limit with respect to some, all the partitions actually going to, with mesh size going to zero of some interval. And then, this is a bad notation, but okay, so I think you know what I mean. So these are now integrals within this partition, of course, these are not the same values. And then, this should be something like Riemann sum. Okay, so we know this is, yeah. I want to use this, okay? Why not? Okay, in particular, this should be independent of a chosen partition at some point. Many people then, in the middle of this E-to-Skets-Gate-Gate-Theory, started to choose or define integrals with respect to fixed sequences of partitions. And then you can go, this is a nightmare, so it means nothing. Okay, what we know is if f, if y would be given as a function of x, you know, so for example, like in Eter's formula, so f would be c1, we can do the following. So we know, first of all, that this limit did not exist. In general, there will be no limit of this. And we know it by definitely, for example, in the case when we choose y in this form, for stochastic integration, right? Okay, but we also know what we have to do in order to, let's say, add something or modify this in some approach in order to have the limit actually converging. Okay, so if we expand now further, so think of this as a, basically, yeah, so we put this on the left-hand side. Of course, we don't know what that is actually, but okay, ah, this should be R here, by the way. Right, sorry, this is a mistake. Right, because this is xr, and if I now, the following, I will consider, I think of s and t small, right? So we will integrate over a small time. And you need to start to think about what is going on with all these expansions if the mesh size is actually going to zero, if s, if the absolute value of t minus xr, okay? So it makes sense to look at the Taylor expansion. So I'll subtract the, first of all, first we want some. I can rewrite it in terms of one integral, because everything has room. And now, of course, this is an increment of this type, so I can tailor expand this. So I can write this as, let's say, another integral from s to R, f' of x u, v x u, v x r. Of course, there are a lot of assumptions here, okay? So I just formally compute this, okay? And now, yeah, as I told you, Taylor expand this. This is then again, because you can write this as, maybe I could switch from this to this step without moving to this intermediate step, which is not necessarily well defined. So I can write this as the integral of s to t, f' of x, that should be xs, I think. Yeah, this is f' of xs. And then I have, yeah, so this is another typo in this tutorial. So I just take this value of the integrant that's the lower value here. I can choose another value, and then, of course, yeah, okay. And then I get the integral of x r minus x s. I just iterated it. I just iterated it, plus some remainder, that will depend on s and t, of course of f and all the time, but it doesn't matter, so it's a functional of f, s and t, and of course of x. Okay, well, if you look at this conversion, this expansion, we can get the convergence here, so that's the major idea now, we can get convergence. So, well, I put this on the left-hand side, so remember, y is equal to f of x, so I have f of x, s, y is x, s, and then, I hope I did it right, I think, yes, this is plus f prime of x, s, and then I just introduce a new notation, I write this integral as double x, s, t, because it depends on two indices, times x, s, t. So, I look at this expansion, or Riemann-Sum of the type approximation, for petitions, early p as the mass size of p goes to zero, okay? So, we can get the convergence of this summation, Riemann-Sum, provided, so under which assumptions, provided, this additional object, this additional object, this additional object, which you might think of as an iterated integral, but in fact, it need not be, so I can look at s it counts as two parameters, so I can look at it it as a function in this increment and what I assume now is that this as a function in these two variables is two alpha continuous. And another thing that we of course have if this is a smooth differential path is some kind of consistency relation. So the point is that we only need basically we could start a whole integration theory with an abstract two parameter function that has nothing to do with the path x. So it need not be actually of this type. But it could be anything. But of course you need in order to make sense out of that and there should be some relation to the path. So there should be some relation between this object and the path. And the object, the relation that should be is just a so-called chance relation. So satisfying chance relation. So chance relation just says that, which is a consistency condition. Because you see, you have some choices. For example, I could have chosen here you already, since you are already trained in in the context of synchastic integration. I didn't say anything about the meaning of this integral. I could choose, for example, in the context of a Brownian motion, I could choose E to integral or Svetomovich integral, half integral, whatever. Or I could choose any other definition of an integral, reasonable integral. So this object, in general, is not unique. I should have to do something with x because otherwise we are doing nonsense. Okay? And this is some kind of consistency condition. Maybe we should have the following one, which is, of course, mimicking this origin. So if I subtract, we think around something which is in the green, x to u, u to t, then that should be actually, and this is another typo here, x of, oh, this is a bad thing. So this should be x of s minus x of u times x of u minus x of t. And, yeah, you should be in the green, right? Between s and t. Now there's another typo here. So this is, yeah, you see, this is a connection between the two objects. So it links somehow this object to this one. It does not necessarily imply that x is something like this because this doesn't make sense in general, but okay. It is the algebraic relation that we actually need from something like this. from something like this in the general case. Okay. Okay. Right. And we can expect to have convergence if we add this part to the Riemann-Sum approximation, provided f, for example, is c2 because... of course, of course, you can relax this. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. So, uh-huh. Provided, uh-huh. And f is in c2. Of course, you can relax this, okay? Okay. So, Um, since we can, um... ...one has the program bound. Okay, so I'm just looking now at the remainder. The remainder, what does it look like? Well, this is everything that is written on the other side, right? So this is integral to t, f of xr dxr, which I did not define actually, but okay, minus f of x, I will explain it in a minute, f of xs. So the first example, the summation of n, I subtract f of x times this iterated feature, okay? And the point is that you can estimate, this is now going to improve, if f is c2 with another Teller extension, that this can be estimated by some constants, k times, we see, 2 norm of f, also the supremacal norm of the derivatives show up here, times, well, now, the alpha-Hölder norm to the power of 3 plus the alpha-norm of the path x and the 2 alpha-norm, and the 2 alpha-norm of this iterated integral, times t minus s to the power of 3 alpha. Okay, and here we go, because 3, so remember, alpha was larger than 1 as well. So 3 times alpha is larger than 1. And this is actually going to 0. Right? Because you can estimate this by... ...um... ...um... ...um... ...um... ...um... ...um... ...um... ...um... ...the mesh size to the power of delta, that is positive, times... ...well, the variation... ...of the order of 3 minus f to something which is larger than 1, and this is actually going to 0. Okay, because you can estimate this by... ...um... ...um... ...um... ...um... ...the mesh size to the power of delta, that is positive, times... ...well, the variation of the identity on this function, on this interval, but this is finite. Okay. Okay. What if alpha would not be larger than 1 third? Well, we should just further expand this gap to higher order derivatives. And then we can do the same. Then we have a better remainder here, going higher in the order of alpha, and then this would be also sufficient. Okay. Okay. Okay, so... ...of course this is a lie here at the moment, because we don't have this object. But the real theorem states that this one is a Cauchy sequence. Okay. So you can prove that this one, as a two-parameter process in S and T, is actually a Cauchy sequence in the right topology. And the limit exists, irrespective of the chosen sequence of petitions with Mech-Siles going to zero. So this is a Cauchy sequence, and then the limiting object of this one is just this guy, defined as this guy. It's uniquely defined as the limit of the Cauchy sequence, of course. Okay. Okay, so this is the workhorse. You see you have some kind of abstract integration theory that basically consists of Thaler expansion of second order, comparison to Riemann and some approximation, which is Thaler expansion of first order, right? That's it. And, yeah, this is... You see a little bit that... You see what you know, if you take it for example... Yeah, there's some commentary on this integral. Um... So... If... If, for example, X is differentiable... So, if X is a differentiable, so P X T is just a derivative of T T, then... Well, we could think of this as a usual Riemann integral, and write this as... Yeah, I think you could compute this now, right, maybe you're not curious, this is just one R-chain rule, no? Xt square minus Xs square minus Xs times Xt minus Xs, and you can put this together on the other side, Xt minus Xs. And since this is differentiable, this is actually of the order, right, so you can write this, of course, as the interval from X to Xs dot R v R square, since let's assume this is continuous, the derivative, then it's locally bounded, so this will be of order X minus Xs square. So this is already vanishing, remember, in this expansion. This guy, if I take as a definition of this one exactly this iterated integral, then in this expansion here, this part in the summation over all elements of the partition will actually vanish, because it's already of the order T minus Xs to something which is larger than one, okay? That's the same reason as this one is vanishing, of the order one to step. This is the reason why you don't see this, this iterated integral in the classical integration theory. And, of course, there's much, much more at hand here, we just need the Heller continuity of this one, with Heller exponent larger than one-half, right? Because if the Heller exponent is larger than one-half, then we would have two times alpha larger than one, and this would also vanish. So this is the so-called Young-Integration theory. Stiltschitz integration, you probably know, this is the case where the X is of bounded variation, so if you want, already Lipschitz continuous, not only Lipschitz, if it's Lipschitz, then this is almost this case, right? So it's also vanishing, okay? Okay, but if we have a browning path, so if X is a browning path, then we already see a difference. Then, of course, I need to make sense out of this integral, this is not completely specified, I need to say in which sense do I understand this now, I understand it as the E2 integral, okay? So if I, so I am taking this one as in the E2 sense, I am sending this in the E2 sense, this leads to, well, we can just compute this, because this is, you already see the Lipschitz, okay, so we are going to work this again. So we can reverse E2's formula, alright? So this is nothing else, but we have XT squared minus XS squared, minus the quadratic variation of X, integrated from S to T, X is a browning motion, so there's nothing else but 1 half times T minus S. So that's equal from the backwards, minus, the other integral is okay, so it's just XS times VXR, integrated from S to T, so this is the same as above. So if you put this together, then we have the, so these two terms are the one that we had already, so these add up to one, and then we have the integration. So we have a different type of expansion. Okay? Still, we know if we look at quadratic variation, so this is summed up along some petitions, this difference is actually going to zero, and that actually helps us to define the E2-sochastic integral. Okay? Pathwise, because you see we have, so this would be the E2 integral, this would be this kind of expansion, and we would have this kind of control, or estimate, which means that, and this is now the additional message of this, so you can take the path to the limit, and get an estimate of this integral in terms of the right-hand side, and that means in particular, if X and its, I call it second or iterated integral, although it's some general, if you want so, complement to the path to parameter path, actually converge with respect to these Hölder norms, then also this integral will converge. You know? This is the next thing, the next information that I have. I do not get this in a stochastic integration. There's no way, no? And so I don't know, the stochastic integral itself is actually not, of course, not continuous, to the Hölder norm of the Brownian path. I need more than this. I need more than this. And this, somehow, is the minimal amount of additional information or continuity that we need in order to get a path-wise continuity of the C to integral. Okay? So that's another implication of this. Okay? And we will use this, now, this kind of framework, this functional analytic framework. Of course, I will super quick now, and super vague, not to say it even wrong, in order to make sense of this integral. Okay. Okay. So let's come back to the end of the video, so we can just back to the original problem. So the first thing that we need is we need a good version of this process, of this stochastic convolution. That's the first thing. We know it is H-alpha, so it has, if you are a little bit familiar with this, it has the required Hölder continuity. All right? For some alpha, between one-third and one-half. So I actually only proved Soblev regularity, but okay, so there is something that is there. So just believe me, so it's essentially the same as with, for the Hölder regularity, unfortunately, the Hölder regularity. It's much, much more difficult to compute, so I skip this. Just compute the Hölder regularity. Okay. And another thing that we would like to, this is a technical issue, but there is, let's say, This is a technical issue, but there is, let's say, you avoid additional difficulties if you, instead of taking the stochastic convolution from 0 to t, you consider the so-called stationary solution. Okay, so this is the first object that we construct. Yeah, so where does the stochastic convolution come from? The stochastic convolution actually is, let's switch a little bit the notation. What I have in mind is actually this process later on. What is the stochastic convolution solution for? Well, it's an Orchard-Ruhlbeck equation. Maybe we should have the partial derivative, second order. I keep some space here because I do a little trick later on. You see it in there? That's sigma dWt, so the solution of this equation. Actually, it's given by the stochastic convolution, right? And the only thing is that this operator doesn't have a mass gap, so this is not exponentially decaying. It doesn't have a stationary solution, so it doesn't have an invariant measure or invariant distribution. In order to, let's say, press this into something which has the chance to have a stationary solution, I just subtract minus the identity or minus one there. So if I do that, I have an exponentially decaying term in the solution, and the corresponding semigroup of this operator is exponentially decaying. So the semigroup of the linear part now is just, well, that's very easy. So minus the identity in the integration is just adding e to the minus t in front of the semigroup. This is a semigroup as well, in t. If you differentiate with respect to t, you get as the differential of pt, just this operator, and as the differential of this one, minus one. So that's exactly the corresponding signal. And you see immediately that because of this one, this exponential factor, this one is actually going to zero, even in the operator norm, all things you need and want. Whereas the pt itself, you see this operator has zero eigenvalue, constant functions, only actually zero eigenvalue. So this semigroup is actually not exponentially decaying on constant functions. So it's just zero eigenvalue there, it's not decaying. If we would take the Dirichlet and our Laplace operator here, we could skip this and choose just the semigroup by the Laplace. Okay, so that's another issue. It's a technical issue. It's more than that, but okay. Okay, so we have this one. And now it follows that, well, if I integrate u0 to t, so if I start this equation at t equals zero and integrate up with zero initial condition, then the solution is just given by the stochastic convolution. Yeah, which is nothing else, but, I don't know, I can just use this, what, this is st, sorry for this addition one. Unnecessary step. Okay, so I have this one. This is not a stationary solution. In the law of this one we can compute this, right? It's not independent of t. So it's actually converging as t tends to infinity. What you can do is, you can just integrate from minus infinity instead of zero. And then it makes sense. Of course I need to say what I have here. I take a two-sided Wiener process, or two-sided Brownian motion. What is a two-sided Brownian motion? Well, it's nothing else but... So you can take two independent copies of the Wiener process, one forward in time and actually one backward in time. Okay? And you just define Wt as, well, forward, let's call it this way. If t is larger than or equal to zero and you just say it's backwards in time if t is smaller than zero. And you can prove that the increments are exactly the increments of those process over the whole time interval as you would expect. Also you could do it for the cube Wiener process for Brownian motion, whatever. So it's the same trick because, you see, if you look at an increment of this two-sided Wiener process, and it happens that, let's say, t is larger than zero and s is actually lower than zero, then you can decompose it into two increments. So this would be the forward one. This is zero by convention. This is also zero by convention. These are independent, have the right normal distribution, Gaussian distribution, so as the sum of these Gaussian distributions, they have the required variance, you see? So that's it. Okay? Identity of U over there, yeah? So this is the situation. Is it always W minus s of the backwards? Yeah, you can, of course, think of this as something that's going forward in time and define it as, so just use the different order, basically. It doesn't matter. But it's still at the same refrigeration, or? No, no. Yeah, well, it's a Wiener process with respect to its natural... Ah, that's a good question. Wait a moment. No, there is no... No, there's no filtration in that sense. So, because nothing which is actually linked to the global order on R, yeah? For the reasons you can see. Can I keep this in this way? I would like to keep it in this way, okay? But this is just reverting the indices, okay? Okay, so this is something... So what you do in... So what you... Maybe one more answer. So if you are unhappy with this definition, so what you do is actually you define this integral as a limit of the stochastic integral starting at some minus capital T and letting T go to infinity. Or let's say you choose a negative time and let the time optimize infinity. You see Cauchy's sequence plus Cauchy. It's Cauchy's sequence. And for any finite T, you can define forward filtration. So that's okay. Okay, so maybe... So you can see that this... You can... So that's very... I should recommend this to actually prove that this is a stationary solution. And that this one actually solves this equation. Because you see, if you put this, then this is no longer zero, it's zero, you know? So if you apply the mild solution formula to this initial condition of this form... You see the following. The x0 is the integral for minus infinity up to zero of e to the minus, or T is no zero, you get actually S. P minus S, yeah? So Pt is a semi-glue, right? It's only defined for positive parameters. If S is below zero, this is fine, okay? So it's always... You need to take care of that. DWS plus sigma, maybe I forgot some sigma here, somewhere. And then I think you can do zero of the T of this one. Yeah, and now you can put this under the integral. You get T minus S, Pt minus S plus the remaining part from zero to T, which is exactly the same. So it's also algebraically, with respect to the Maher conclusion, a stationary solution, actually. So in particular, it has the same distribution. Okay, so that defines the stationary solution. Okay, it defines stationary solution. So I put this away... ...of this equation. Yeah, and since this is a stationary solution, the distribution is stationary, and the solution... ...is exactly what we expect. The distribution... ...so it's a normal distribution. And the distribution is... ...has mean zero. And now you need to compute this. The covariance operator, so this will be sigma square, times the integral from zero to infinity, between minus two T. And then the semi-group times the adjoint. Okay, so this is squared... ...and this is two T. Well, that's true. So it's squared in the sense of composition of operators. So it's really... ...but this is a single group. So the square root of the operator is just P2T and Pt. And this is the linear distribution. That's exactly the linear distribution of this element area. Okay? Okay. Right. And I don't know whether we need this, but okay, so we can think of this one without a sigma, Okay, right. And I don't know whether we need this, but okay, so we can think of this one without the sigma, sigma, as the inverse of the operator identity minus the T. We can just try to check this. If not, that's not so important. Okay, but we can compute its kernel, and this is what we need in the following. So this covariance operator will have an integration kernel, so it has the semi-group of the Browning motion itself. So, right. This is some kind of harmonic analysis result. So we can write this one. Maybe I should be a little bit more careful now, so I can write. So this operator particle function at x, so it should be now the solution of the partial differential equation, one-half times identity, minus the pressure should be equal to the left one. That's what it is. And as such, it can be written as the interval, the convolution, between some kernel, over the interval to delta two pi, and the kernel is known. And actually, it's not so difficult to guess what it is. Yeah, so I forgot about the sigma. Yeah, so, okay, so the formula that I'm writing down is actually, it's a very nice formula. It's very straightforward to derive this formula, just from the knowledge that we have on the semi-group. Do you remember? If we apply the semi-group to some trigonometric function, let's say, to cosine of k times x, x is the argument. And if I just divide it in x, cosine is an eigenfunction of the Laplacian. So we know that this is e2 minus k squared times t times the cosine function. Yeah? Now I have 2t, so I need to replace this 2t, this t by 2t in the integration, and I integrate something like this, which would be equal to t over the interval. If I do this, I get that the inverse of this one applied to the cosine would be multiplication of the cosine function is 1 plus k squared. Because if you integrate up there, and then there's a small change of variable, you can see where it comes, it doesn't matter. So that means that in the kernel, which is basically the summation over the Fourier coefficient of the physiophilitudinologic series, we should expect something to have something like this, the cosine of kx divided by 1 plus k squared. And instead of looking only at positive k, because I need to take care also of the sine functions, but I could instead therefore sum up the sine functions, or turn it into cosine functions from minus infinity to plus infinity, so case in the whole numbers. Okay, the next thing is not so clear. So it's a nice identity, which is known. So we can get rid of this nasty series, and just write it as a function. And this function is given by the cosine hyperbolic is divided by the sine. A normalized in some quantity. And now, okay, so I think of this function as a function defined on x in minus pi root 2 pi, plus periodic extension. Okay, just believe me that this is true. So the only thing that we need is, we have a nice functional representation of this kernel, because it obviously shows up in the distribution, or characterizing the Gaussian distribution of the stationary metal, or stationary solution of this linear part of our SPDE, that we are actually interested in. And as such, it is a Gaussian process now, x has this law now, the covariance operating by this one. And now the point is, remember, in order to let this rough path integral theory work, we need some kind of regularity of that process now, with respect to, well, in the initial discussion, with respect to t. But we need the rough integration through the spatial variable x. So, we need to understand or get a version of the stationary solution of this Gaussian process, that has the right Holger regularity. And that's actually the case. And we get the regularity, the spatial regularity, of this Gaussian process, from properties of the covariance operator, from the kernel. Okay? Why is that? Well, that comes from Kolmogorov's continuity theory, so I cannot spend too much time on this. This is now some part of stochastic analysis that I did not touch too much. But, okay, you can see, right? So, you remember, Kolmogorov's continuity theory makes a statement on, well, if I have something, some estimates now of the time increments, actually of this type. So, then, for N-A-T-N-S, we have applied this for the Brownian motion, I also get a continuous, other continuous version. Then, actually, I forgot about this. So, then I have all the continuity of this process. So, this is the time. Does anybody know the result? It should be pt divided by 2α. Can this be? I think it's 1 plus alpha and then... Here? Yeah. 1%. Okay. So, you lose this with Borel-Kinteri, and then, what's going with you? It's up to alpha and right here. You get something here. I don't know. I don't know. Something like this. Something like this. So, we have this. I forgot about that. So, if this is Brownian motion, this beta is equal to 2α, then this should be... I need to choose... Okay. I don't know. I don't know. Sorry for this. But, okay. You can look it up and you see. So, what I want to say is the following. So, if this is, for example, 2, you can express this identity in terms of the covariance, right? Because this is the variance of, let's say this is the center process, then this is the variance of xp minus 2 times the covariance of xp with xs plus the variance of xs. And these are given in terms of the covariance of xs. And these are given in terms of the covariance operator. Yeah? And if you now have the information on the covariance of the radium, but the Brownian motion, this is nothing else but t minus xs for t and t2. Yeah? That's not a mistake here for the moment. Then you can infer from that the time where the regularity of the process. And as such, now that we have, instead of looking at some SPDE, like this one. And we exchange now by, for example, the L2 norm. Then we have a control of the spatial regularity in t and s. But we could also, and maybe I should do it in this way, so I can also think of not only increments with respect to time, but also with respect to space. And then I have something which depends on t minus s, so this will be the same scaling as I would expect in the Brownian motion, because I'm looking at the data process. But then I have also a spatial scaling. And that comes actually from the kernel of the covariance operator, like this one here, with respect to x and y. And so if I have a hand on the spatial regularity of the kernel, I get Herder-Continuity control via Cornelow's extension theory with respect to the spatial parameter, and that's exactly what we need in order to make this rough path interval theory work. Okay, so far, so okay. No? No further, some questions here? I mean, no details, no proofs, okay? Just an indication that it works. Oh, you have some questions? Shall I explain something? So you remember this criteria somehow? Or this? Right. Okay. And so the only thing is now that you want to also discuss the spatial regularity of the solution of this process, that's also okay with you, I guess? Right? And the only thing is, just try to, maybe you're worried about this one, how can I refer information on the solution of the single point x here? Okay. How would you do this? Does anybody know how it works? Okay. So if you take the statement of the solution, yeah? You know it's down to the solution with this covariance operator. I'll just use this as a short computation, okay? Now, what does it mean? It means that if you take, for example, if you take the statement of the solution, you know it's down to the solution with this covariance operator. I'll just use this as a short computation, okay? Okay. Now, what does it mean? It means that if you take, for example, an integral of x, t with some function f in L2, then this is a normal random variable, yeah? It means 0 actually is 0 here, and variance is given by q applied to f in the integral of that, okay? So that's the definition, okay? Now, so for example, what I have is if I take now t and f equal to the same, to be the same, I have, I can put it under the same sign, right? So this is nothing else. I have the same scar for it. That's linear, of course, right? Okay. And now this is, so this is f of x, f minus d of x times q applies to f minus d of x dx in the space of the length. That's just the definition, okay? Okay. Now, the next thing is, I want to keep this one. I'm going to continue here, computation. And now, I have a kernel for this, I can write this as a double integral. Okay. So this one is actually k, and then I have another integral, and I integrate f minus g again. And now this is the variable 1. Now, basically, I can put it in the interchange of the order of integration, so I have this double integral. Okay, where the kernel shows up here, and somehow measures the link between the variable x and y, basically. Now I choose f and g in a special way. I choose f, converging to the Dirac measure in x. So I choose f to be something which is more and more concentrated in the point x. And I do the same for g, converging to the Dirac measure in y. Because I want to control the function xt at x and the function xt at y. Because if I have this one, then this implies, that this integral, xt of, let's say, z, f of z, dz, converges to the integral of the Dirac measure in x, which is nothing else but xt of x. Okay? And the same for g. Okay. And there we are, so we need now to see, or to look at this integral, what happens to this integral. If f is converged to this one, if f is converged to this one, and g is converged to this one. So this double integral converges to, I hope I get this. Well, the first thing that you do is actually, I hope I can get this now. Let me do it this way for a moment. It should be k of x minus y. So the first thing is, the unfortunate thing is that this should be bar, which is not the x. Okay. Okay. Okay. Now the, probably I should write first the, okay. Probably I should first include this k of x minus y of f of y minus q of y. Okay. Okay. Okay. Now this converges to, now this is exactly the same, I just need to evaluate the kernel. Now with respect to the variable y, once in x, and once in y. Okay. I get this one. Okay. And then I have another integration with respect to the variable x bar. And I need to then later on integrate this with respect to, or evaluate this then with respect to the variable x bar with respect to x y. Okay. Okay. So this gives the, I hope I do it correctly, something like this from the square. So this is, okay. So this is, okay. Okay. Okay. So this gives the, I hope I do it correctly, something like this from the square. So this is, okay. Okay. Now this one goes now to, I hope it works out. Okay. Okay. Okay. So this gives the, I hope I do it correctly, something like this from the square. So this is, okay. Now this one goes now to, I hope it works out. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. So this should be x minus x, which is zero. Sometimes it's not very fine. I think it's very not here. I don't know. Minus k of y minus x. And then I have minus y minus x. Okay. So this should be something like, two times k of zero. Maybe a little mistake here. Minus. And now I have an odd kernel. Right. Okay. Minus x. If you see, if you have a look at this, this should be an equal. So equal because it's just from cosine functions. So this is two times k of x minus y. Okay. I hope this is good. Okay. Okay. And now I see what happens. So if you have another continuity of this, you can see. Okay. Okay. So if you have another continuity of this, this should be an equal. So if you have another continuity of the kernel in zero with respect to x minus y, you get exactly those moment estimates of the increments, of the spatial increments. So this gives you that the expectation, for example, of x is equal to x minus y. So if you have another continuity of the kernel in zero with respect to x minus y, you get exactly those moment estimates of the increments, of the spatial increments. So this gives you that the expectation, for example, of x t of x minus x t of y squared. What are two higher moments here? It doesn't matter. This is learned by some constants. So if you have another continuity of the kernel in zero with respect to x minus y, you get exactly those moment estimates of the increments, of the spatial increments. So this gives you that the expectation, for example, of x t of x minus x t of y squared. What are two higher moments here? It doesn't matter. So this is learned by some constant times two times three of zero minus theta of x minus one. You see? And this is now, for example, Lipschitz in zero. Then you have something which is something like Lipschitz constant times x minus one. That's exactly what you're looking for. Okay? And then you can add up the timing commands. Then you get all three kinds of typical time and so on and so on. Okay? So this is basically the reason how you can expand spatial regularity from SPEs from the Gaussian process. You just need to know the comparison to the kernel. This is the technique how to do this. I do. I did very many, let's say, simplifications. Many integrals and regularity don't exist. Many limits don't exist. But okay, if everything works out, then you go along this way. Okay? Okay. Now we have this one. So now you can guess that the information on this one, the spatial regularity of this kernel, actually gives us results on the regular continuity of the spatial resolution of the Gaussian process. Okay. Okay. All right. The rest is collecting the exponents in the right way. And the result out of that is, of course, there's a lot of theory technique going on here. XT for a fixed T, when we lift it for a rough path. XT and this second-order process as T is another type of inscriptor. Okay. No. No. No, that's not true. Sorry. Sorry. This is not the T parameter. Okay. I should write it this way. XT of x, because I'm doing it to the x, the spatial parameter, xT. And this is the two parameters here. Okay. And let's say x is lower equal than y between . Okay. Okay. How can I define this guy? Well, I expect this to be some kind of iterated interval, like in the original rough path interval theory. Well, I should expect something like this. Remember, so everything with these little times we place now with these little spatial variables, spatial intervals. So I want to define something like this. So I would expect something like an integral like this. So this is a new, actually, spatial variable. Now I would, but of course I cannot, I haven't defined this. What can I do? I can take a smooth approximation and take limit epsilon to zero. Smooth approximation, then it's exactly in the type of way smooth means differential with respect to x. And this is well defined in the classical sense that I've shown you. And then I take the limit epsilon to zero. So I can just define this as a limiting model of smooth Gaussian processes. And the nice thing is that you can take any approximating sequence. Well, but you get to do it. Yeah. Okay. It depends on the approximating sequences. As you can imagine, it's the same as with the scoreboard and e to integral. It depends on what approximating sequence you choose. If you choose the usual something like this. If you convolute with respect to some smooth, sorry, convolute with respect to the spatial variable, with respect to some direct sequence. So for any approximating sequence, that's the epsilon of Gaussian processes. Yeah. And now I've seen, of course, the limit to the spatial parameter x. T is fixed. But then you can also smooth the spatial parameter x. So smooth the spatial parameter x. So smooth the spatial parameter x. And I should somehow pozwol somebody out. So if only of the sensors. You'll be fooling. So this would be sufficient. And then you can prove And this is also not too difficult for every alpha, by the way. For every alpha less than one hand, we can have this bond. In the alpha-hether norm. And this bond in the 2-alpha-hether norm. Now this is meant with the spatial variable, but I also want to, I'm looking for the regularity with respect to time. I didn't take care of the time at the moment, but I also need to take care of the time here. And this additional estimate gives me also control of the two times, so I can just choose continuous, even also another continuous version of this path realization, the limiting Gaussian process. So again, let's do this by some instances. Q minus T minus S to the power of theta times Q. For all Q greater or equal than 1, is the question of the statement that there existed. Okay, and that shows we have a continuous version of alpha. This is by a path. Perder-formularity, alpha with respect to x, and 2-alpha both thought of, with respect to the spatial variable, of the iterated integral. And we have continuity with respect to time. The continuity with respect to time in this matrix is a little bit worse. So we don't have further right away. So the theorem just assures that we have continuous version of it. Okay. Right. Yeah, I didn't define this so far. I'll do this in order to emphasize that this is meant to be a spatial variable. So the alpha-norm of u is the supremo one. This one. And the 2-alpha norm of capital U. Capital U is now a function. In x at y, where x is lower equal than y. And this is actually not true. No, this is true. Yes. Okay. Right. okay right okay now we are able to formulate the theory I take exactly this realization of my Gaussian process and the theory tells me overall so theory was let and let this condition be in c beta then for almost every realization and all the results on this rough path realization of the Gaussian process almost everywhere so for almost every realization of x so of the stationary solution of this Wernscher-Ruhlbeck process showing up in the composition there exists some t strictly positive sometimes such that the original equation which I have just erased the original one has a unique mod solution and this solution takes values in space of continuous functions taking values in continuous parts taking values in beta in the continuous function so this is in the regular in the initial condition and so the statement says it stays there the solution for some positive time t you have a global solution so this t actually might depend on the initial condition but if the the coefficients are actually bounded then you can also have a global solution so if g is bounded remember that g is in front of the the spatial derivative of the solution so that's a nasty guy so the spatial solution the derivative spatial derivative of the solution that's the one that you need to take care of very much because it leads to this so the g is bounded and in addition all derivatives first of of f and g are bounded so for example then f and g but g is also bounded in addition then the solution is bounded and that means that t is independent of the initial condition and actually of the x the solution is okay so that's the that's the statement okay so you have a pathways pathways solution of this of the spde so the equation for u and just a bit not this and the idea of the proof is of course we don't do this today the idea of the proof is fixed point I'm going to try to this to this remainder because the other part is everything that is already there right so the idea is you look at the high iteration so the fixed point of the high iteration okay so that's the idea the only thing is that yeah maybe okay so basically if you look at the right hand side you have actually the whole two terms yeah I forgot the exponential damping so what you do is you also there I mean the previous was okay previously okay now we slightly modify this we have the stationary solution because otherwise we don't get this so I get this damp I add this exponential damping and then the solution actually can be decomposed into and I have minus the identity to them so the solution is yes so u is v plus and of course I need to compensate here so there should be a plus u here yes so there's a little half of u yes so there's a little half of u yes so there's a little half of u f half of u is f of u piece i can't find it i can't find it there should be something here i can't find it i can't find it there should be something here i can't find it ok so the f hat here is f of u f of u is f of u So that you can decompose now the original solution into V+. And so we get the state, the rush part of the realization of this Gaussian process, we fix this, we fix one rush part of that realization, and then now we need to solve this fixed point equation. And that means, so if you look at pica iteration fixed point maps, basically what you do, you need to control those two parts here and the appropriate function spaces. So you have basically a classical part, which is mt x applied to a V, t small x, so mt should just denote this integral. And the new one is actually this one, because it involves this rough part, at least because of the spatial point. Yeah, so to control, so that's the last thing that we just have here. Now, step one is to control mt x1, classical, how you would do this with ODE's, with Lipschitz coefficients, and so on and so on. And so you prove that we have the following a priori bounds. So this one is defined as the supreme norm of the corresponding C1 norm. Okay, now I did not introduce this, so you can control this in terms of the rough part norm of x. The rough part norm of x is just the sum of the Hölder norm of x itself and the two-halter norm of the two-parameter, or the iterated integral, okay, or the substitute of the iterated integral. And that gets basically, yeah, this is true, provided, so this constant depends on k, where k is now bound for the initial condition in the Rillan norm. And the rough, well, you also need, well, this is the initial condition of the stationary solution, you can guess that it should have the same regularity, and should be also bounded with this k. And v now is, with respect to, what is this one, this is wrong, is this, the capital x, so this should denote the capital x, and the x that is coming up here in the decomposition. This is bound by k as well. So you get a uniform constant, depending on those upper bounds of these Hölder and C1 norm of v, times, this is the dependence on the rough part, and it just, you know, this. I'm going to write this up. Yeah, so this one is defined below, so that's the supremum, now I have, this is now also looked at as a process with respect to the parameter t. So it's not quite a rough part, it's a little bit more, so it's the rough part form of uniform of x, t, which is the spatial variable uniformity in the supremum. Okay, so I think I have chosen capital T, I want to solve the equation here in this example up to time to 1 at most, otherwise you should have here enough time. Okay, that's also not true, we lose a little bit. So I need to choose the Hölder regularity here a little bit lower in the iteration, so for a fixed alpha, which is, okay, still need to be larger than one-third, otherwise I'm lost, but it should be strictly smaller than one-third. Okay, so there's something that you lose in the iteration here, when we estimate something. You lose a little bit lower than that. Okay, so we are already at the end, but you see, now you go into this object, and when you start to basically do estimations with respect to these 1 norms, this 1 norms, so you need to control the supremum of the solution as well as the supremum of the derivative. And that encounters in the particular, that's the final information that we give today, so we need to control something like this. So in particular, you need to control the derivative of pt of any function f, so I have this something which is now written on the right-hand side. So you need to get good estimates from this one. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. And the message is that the, okay, so the point is that the f is, this is, the regularity of the f is harder, which is equal to beta, from the exponent beta, and so you need to understand now the continuity of the semigroup of the Laplace and in other spaces, yeah. And this is where, again, the kernel shows up, where you need the kernel, the integral kernel, now of the position semigroup, not of the resolvent. And what you can prove is something like this, so that's the basic ingredient, so, for example, what you can prove is that the semigroup or something like that is bounded by some constant times the supremum of f. That looks a little bit dubious. Is that really true? No, this cannot be. So that's a proofing, and it should be wrong. Yeah, this cannot be, because it cannot load uniformly in t, because it can take t equal to zero, then ptf converges to f, but on the right hand, so, and that tells me I can control the derivative of f, but I have no derivative of f in general, okay, so this is, this is wrong. So we have something like this, so the, I don't know, so the, I don't know, so the, I don't know, So we have something like this, so the c-beta Hölder norm is lower equal than the contraction in the Hölder norm, that's very nice, so that's okay. But the gradient of the tf is in the supremum, that's one part of the C1 norm of this guy, so this case is bounded by some uniform constant, in the appendix it's written for the multivariate case, so this is actually the kernel on the n-dimensional case, then there's a dependence on the dimension here, and then you have something like t to the ball, beta minus 1 over 2, so this is a prefector that blows up actually, if t is going to 0, times the beta, let alone 3. And everything holds for r, for all, t, 100 and 0 of course, and for all beta, pg, 0, n, I think that's okay. Okay, so you have this estimate, and these are sometimes called heat kernel estimates, or let's say continuity properties of the heat kernel, and you can plug them in, in order to control the corresponding polar norms of those terms, actually later on those terms, but this one is more of the same, and the second one is just... Okay, I will stop here. Do you want to see more of the proof next week, or should I do something else? So it's up to you. So it becomes more and more technical. But I think you'll get a good flavour of what rough path is, actually. So the alternative would be, I can, I will certainly close this with another discussion of the consequences of the interval, of this results, I will not completely draw to the new subject. One other subject that I could start then, next week, if we do not, if you don't want to see this, everything, is some nice results on, also has to do with the scaling. Yeah, it has to do with some, another SPDE, which is a very, has nice features, and where this kind of, you see already, where this kind of, where if you put it on the computer, discretize it, you get different limits in your simulation, depending on what kind of, what kind of, let's say, noise approximation you actually choose in your computer. Of course you have to discretize. With it to time, time is not the issue, but also particularly in physical space, your SPDE. And then, unfortunately, there are instabilities in the numerical approximation schemes, which you, of course, don't see if you only look at one discretization. You only see those in the, let's say, scaling hierarchy. So if you, for example, refine the spatial resolution by a certain factor, then, and you see this in the limit, of course you cannot take the limit, but it's only finite, but it's only finite, but if you will do that, of course, you can just try to, let's say, extrapolate your solution along, your solutions along the spatial resolution parameters. And you might already guess that if you are looking at those SPDEs, with this, let's say, non-trivial integral showing up there, that what you actually do on your computer on this realization of this integral actually will very much depend on how you choose the noise approximation, how, for example, how, for example, this rough part realization actually looks like. And there's some nice, so Martin Haller has put it to the point, and there's a nice example showing these kind of scaling properties. It's also not easy. Okay, it's up to you, so you choose. Now or next week, it's up to you. Do you want to choose now? I'm not prepared anyway. Or do you want to see something else? So, let's, so, continue with this. See the end of everything? Who is for continuing this? Okay, one, two. Okay, who is for, let's say, putting this to an end as soon as possible and then continue with the other one? Okay, so people who want to see other different things. And who else want to see something different? So, what do we want to see? In the beginning of the Prado it's hinted that SPE theory can be applied to stochastic flows, which sounds kind of interesting, but I don't know whether there's actually some frame which would be interesting to see that. Okay. Okay. Actually, I don't know. Is it written in the red book or in the...? Anyway, you're only one, right? I mean, okay, apart from that, I could add this, let's say, in two weeks of now, but would you, let's say, jump on this topic? Which I actually don't know. Let me show you. I guess I don't know if you showed me. I don't know what he writes. The cover or what's the cover? Where he writes this. So this is the red book, right? The red book is the part of the subject. Yes, it is. Okay. Maybe something from the filtration theory? In the sci-fi version? Signal process, filtering. In case you're filtering. So this is too weird. Okay. Okay, so then... Okay, so... I will draw some conclusion out of the result. Do you want to say something? Is there a way for you to speak about solid separation? And in the context with SBDs or...? I can do this. Yes. If you want this more than the... Okay, so I will bring this to an end, of course. I will not prove it anymore. Okay, let's keep that. Okay. And I will take... I guess I'm half an hour or something like that. And then... Yeah, it depends on you. So here's another suggestion. Filtering. So this one or filtering. Do you know what filtering is? Um... Um... So we have a... For example, a stochastic differential equation. That's final dimensional. Could be. Could be also an SBD. Um... Um... Could be. Could be also an SBD. Um... Okay, but you don't observe this directly. But you just... get an indirect observation. The observation is given on the right. It's given on the right. So... Um... Okay, so... So this is for the signal sometimes. And the information you have is... Uh... Some of the information is given on the right. Um... Could be also an SBD. Um... Could be also a deterministic boundary. Um... Could be also a deterministic boundary. Um... So... Okay. So... Okay, but you don't observe this directly. But, uh... You just, uh... Uh... You just, uh... Uh... Uh... Uh... Uh... Uh... Uh... Uh... Uh... Uh... Uh... Is, uh... Some observation of x. And for simplicity, I will assume that this is of this type. W and V are independent. For example, independent boundary motion. Could be correlated, but that's actually... Um... Um... Yeah. Okay. Independent boundary motion. Okay. So what... Where does this... That's an engineering problem. So what could it be? So for example, the x could be, uh... Uh... Uh... Uh... The state of an airplane. Or a target. Okay. So for example, position... Um... Uh... Velocity... Acceleration. Uh... Yeah. So three... Three information that you need in order to, let's say, write down the Newton equations of motion, basically. And, um... Yeah. This could be, for example, um, return this acceleration by turbulence, so some stochastic forcing terms, no, no, no, no, no. So that's intrinsic momentum. Of course, small momentum. And the y actually could be a radar signal. What is a radar signal? It measures. It measures the position only. Yeah. As a function of time. Yeah. So you see the target. You see, basically, with these measurements, you see subsequent positions of the target of the airplane. Usually, radar signals are noisy, so they can have some kind of additional measurement noise. Yeah. It's very small, but it's there. And, uh, for example, in the context of applications, the radar signals are quite slow. Yeah. You get, for example, on the airport, if you follow the radar, if the radar of the airport actually tracks a landing plane, for example, in comparison to the velocity of the tide of the plane, so the frequency of the observation square is lower. It's lower. It's even lower already, if you want to say. Yeah. Um. So the name of the game is now to find a good estimate of x, because you don't see x, in terms of y. Okay. So what you want is, uh, the conditional expectation of x, t, for example, given the information provided by the radar signal. That's some kind of, uh, major, um, issue here. And you would like to have some confidence intervals, so that means that's also something which is the statistics of the posterior distribution. Okay. So this would be conditional distribution of x, t, conditioned on, uh, the observation of the radius. So it's a function of y. Okay. Uh, that's a posterior that's sometimes called the posterior. Okay. Now the, and here's the SPDE. The SPDE, so this is a measure. Okay. This is a distribution. Um, it's a measure on the state space of the signal. So that could be the measure on, in this case, on Rd. Okay. Okay. And there is actually, um, so for example, it could have a density, this measure. Then, uh, I could write down a dynamic equation for the, for the density. Okay. And as such, this equation will be a stochastic partial differential equation. So the equation, so I can write this in the following way. Okay. So, okay. So, eta t of f is just the integral of f against the posterior distribution. Okay. And, um, now this is, uh, this is a real valued function. And I can write down now the dynamic equation for this and we'll start this one. So, L, L is the generator of the signal process. So, L is, I have sigma, sigma transpose, trace of the second-order derivative, plus, um, first-order derivative in the inner product of the mean. Yeah. This is the generator as you know it from, uh, the, uh, stochastic virtual equation. Okay. This generator shows up here. Do you know this equation? Have you seen this? This is the weak formulation of the Fokker-Planck equation. Yeah? You recognize this? Yeah? So, it's just, the Fokker-Planck equation just tells me the time evolution of the distribution of the SCE. It's written up in an analytically weak form because if you, you see, this is a partial differential operator. Um, I could, uh, also, if I have a smooth density, write this as a partial differential equation, and that's exactly the form of the Fokker-Planck equation. So, I could write this as, so, I can write down the density, and provided this density is smooth, differentiable, twice, at least. I could write, it's a little partial derivative, and then I need to integrate my parts here. Right? I put the L from the test function to, uh, the density, which is the form of what you want. I do not spell it out this. You can compute this by integration of parts here. Here are two spatial derivatives integrated parts to get rid of the, to freely appears, basically. And the same is here. Okay. So, this is the Fokker-Planck, but that's not the, of course, not the solution of the posterior distribution. That's the solution of the distribution as if we have no information at all. But we have information at all. So, what is the impact on conditioning? Yeah? So, I need to condition now on the information that I have. I should get some additional information on the distribution. That's going from the prior to the posterior distribution. And the additional terms that show up here are exterior forcing terms coming from my observation process. So, this observation process now is basically shifting the Fokker-Planck solution. So, the a priori solution, the a priori distribution of the SDE, which I have, if I have no information available, now towards the observation in some sense. But it does so in a particular way. And that way actually depends on, of course, the h should come in and also the measurement error should come in. Because, for example, if the measurement error is zero and h is the identity, I should just take x. If h is the identity, gamma is zero, then I can just differentiate y with respect to t, I get x. Right? So, I should somehow invert this equation to get the x here, in the best, in the least square sense. And you can compute this and it turns out, this is a little bit before, I will not explain too much on this. So, it involves the covariance with respect to the solution of this equation of our test function f with h. And then, I need to invert the noise, or measure by the noise covariance. So, that's gamma, gamma, t, post, t, minus one, I assume that this is vertical, over to y, t. That's not the whole truth here, but okay, so something you can already see. If the gamma is actually going to zero, this one will become incredibly large, infinite. That means, the prior distribution of our plan gets an infinite force kick towards y. And I take the differential of y, and that's actually h of x. That's exactly what I have. And that should be my best guess of the solution, that I can get out of y. That's one. On the contrary, if y becomes very large, if the measurement variance becomes large, let's assume in finite, then this information is actually useless, right? Because the measurement doesn't give any useful information on x. Because I only see measurement noise, basically. And you see this here, if the error becomes large, this pre-factor actually is zero. It becomes zero noise. So, the best way that I can do, in the infinite measurement limit, is just to take the intern-Weber-Fogger-Planck equation, as if I had no information. Okay? Okay, so this is the meaning of the intuition of this equation. Unfortunately, this is not quite right, because it doesn't provide, actually, this is not a martigalium, whatever that is. I mean, of course, you know what a martigalium is. But, so, you need another correlation term, and this correlation term is actually the integral of h, how I look at the, what I measure from the matrix, from the quantum signal types. What is the intuition of that? This is called the denomination term. Why? Because this measures the amount of information in the measurement that is provided by the prior integration. So, if I have the Fogger-Planck equation, one, iter t of y, so the integral, is just the expectation of y, and without knowing the actual value, the realization of y. The difference between this one measures the amount of independent information that is contained in the information with regard to the forecast, basically. You know? And that section is called the innovation. So, what we get is, and this is the full equation, that is called the Kushner's Automation and it adds a forcing tool, which comes from the innovation, the independent model of information in the exhibition, which is modulated according to our, basically, measurement covariance. So, how, and how, actually, how we measure this. Okay? So, if you, now you need to integrate the parts once again, to write down the importance of guessing differential equation. I'm not able to write this, I think. Maybe, yes. Allow me to show you this. This is called the innovation. So, then I get, yeah, I need to write down the covariance now. This is h divided by x minus the integral of h, with respect to, yeah, allow me just to write this as dy of h, equal to dx times the gamma, gamma transposed to the minus one times the integral of h doesn't exist because it's of unbounded variation. So, this is a partial differential equation. Stochastic partial differential. Why is stochastic? Because, well, the innovation term involves the y, and the y is of unbounded variation. And it's a partial differential equation because it involves partial derivative surface. Okay? So, this is the filtering equation. And the engine, it's one of the most used equations in engineering and sciences. Of course, the engineers don't have a clue what it means, actually. But they compute this, and it shows up in everyday life, many times. One last remark is, how can it be that if you, for example, in this target tracking example, if you only track the positions at a different time, how can you reconstruct the whole signal? Well, it's clear, because if you see the subsequent frequencies of the positions, you can infer the velocities, right? And if you know the velocities, then you can also infer the acceleration, because they are functional. This is called the identifiability problem. So, engineers are asking what is the minimal amount of dimensions, variance there, and you need to measure in order to reconstruct the full system in a unique way. Okay, so what is the name of the game here? The name of the game is that this one must be done online. Online means in real time. Yeah? So, you need to get good approximations of these conditional expectations in the, let's say, real time application. Think of the target tracking, think of targeting an airplane, if you want to, for example, a Landenstrahlen, or how is it called? I don't know. These assistance, landing assistance systems, like the airport, they just need to work in real time. They have to, basically, what they do is actually solve this equation in real time. That's, of course, really not true. I mean, they do some... The original application was, and still is the most important one, is satellite controlling. Yeah? Because, you see, and here you see the full range, you know. So, if this is the Earth, and here we have the control station somewhere here, and the satellite is somewhere here. So, the signal takes some time to get this. Okay? And this type of... And, of course, you need to control this guy, you need to first have a clue where this guy actually is, in what state this guy actually is. So, this one was, this equation was invented, of course, in this friend book, in the Apollo mission, in the 1960s. So, that was when the theory started, and it goes with the name of Kalman. So, you can go with the Kalman, Kalman filter. Kalman is the most cited mathematician, because it is everywhere. This type of numerical algorithm. Final words. So, here today, we are looking at, as our engineering colleagues did this, for decades, good approximations, in particular for the nonlinear case. In the linear case, this has been more or less fully understood, and there is a very simple, so-called, finite dimensional realization, and that actually goes with the name of Kalman. I'm going to proceed with the continuous time. And, in infinite, well, in the general nonlinear case, it's quite involved, and still there is a lot of much work to do. Okay. So, let's filter. Okay. I ask you next week, okay? How to continue. Good. Any questions? Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. Thank you. Thank you. The divinity in this whole öffnet, which is the whole other do So, 100 is here, and we have a whole lot of information, and if I have a script, if I have this, I have a 4.0. There is still a Faltung there. No, it's not. Okay. Thank you very much. Thank you very much. Thank you very much. Thank you very much.

