Spde14.txt
==========

Exported: March 06, 2026

----------------------------------------

SUMMARY

This lecture excerpt transitions from the technical verification of **fixed-point maps** in rough stochastic partial differential equations (SPDEs) to the practical application of **Bayesian filtering** in biological modeling. The speaker details a **path-wise control** method for estimating "nasty" terms within rough path analysis, using **Kubinelli derivatives** and remainder estimates to ensure convergence where classical Ito integrals might fail. This mathematical framework is then applied to the problem of **intracellular dynamics**, specifically modeling substance concentrations through **reaction-diffusion systems** like the Nagumo equation. The core challenge addressed is **stochastic filtering**, where an observer must reconstruct hidden variables from noisy, partial measurements by calculating a **posterior distribution**. The lecture concludes by introducing the **Kallianpur-Striebel formula** as a rigorous tool for representing these conditional probabilities, laying the groundwork for the **Zakai equation** in modern filtering theory.

Keywords: Rough path analysis, Stochastic PDE solutions, Fixed-point map, Zakai equation, Bayesian filtering theory

CONTENT

All right, so, I'm not quite sure if you want to post it in the exam days, and, yeah, okay, so if there's anything, so you should have received the dates that you have fixed, and so on, and so on, if there's any question, then write me now. Okay, yeah, so I wanted to, I still need to finish and take a little bit this lecture on rough stochastic PDE, and I think I formulated the theory, I formulated the main answers concerning the fixed-point map, that was the solution to the rough spde, and then rough stochastic PDE, and then the PDE, and, yeah, remember, so I was talking about in this fixed-point map, basically about the fixed-point of this process, etx, so this is just the interval of t, e to the minus, so there's an exponential damping, this is the semi-group of the Laplace operator on the torus, so then we had, basically, an easy-to-run, maybe this one, so this was the easy term, which could be dealt with with classical estimates, to get some, okay, maybe I just fix this first, and carefully, and I'll continue. So this was, so the u, basically, is equal to v, dx, so we look at this particular decomposition, minus, oh, no, no, this is also, I'll rearrange the terms, so this, x dx, this is the rough part, if you want so, and then minus, and this was, this is the reason why I introduced this, this was, so I think this should be u plus, yeah, so we look at this decomposition of the solution of our ultimate process process that we are interested in, into something this is, depending on the initial condition, basically, and the stochastic convolution, in some sense, and the smoother part, in some sense, and this one is explicitly given, and just shortening equations, and we find this quantity of x plus, like, maybe there's an x here, I guess. Okay, so this is the process that shows up here. Okay, that would add to this, so, the second part of the solution was the nasty guy involving the derivative of the, the, uh, the, uh, the stochastic, or the gaussian random field, um, so that was, uh, so that was, uh, minus, T, minus, S, and I used the, the representation of this single, uh, the kernel on the, uh, torus, and then I applied this to e of mu, and then instead of basically differentiating this with respect to y, we look now at this object, um, as a spatial stochastic intervention, right, so that was the new thing here. Um, okay, and this is the nasty guy, so this is the term Nt, uh, x, uh, 2, 0 to f, okay? Right, so the, the, the, the, the, the major point was about, uh, what kind of estimates we would like to get. Um, so we had something, um, which gave us an estimate of the order, um, well, we could, uh, estimate this one. Um, um, so that was basically the, uh, uh, the supremum of the C1 norm with respect to x, uh, supremum with respect to time of, um, this function, um, function data process, uh, so this was bounded by constants, which depend locally on a certain bounds on the, um, um, corresponding to the, um, um, to this object, um, involving basically the supreme, the alpha, so the, um, alpha-Höller norm of x, t itself, and then the 2-alpha-Höller norm of the, you know, second variation, called the second variation. Um, and c, k was, uh, uh, um, finite, uh, so, so this was a locally finite bound, in the sense that this concept depends on certain, um, um, alpha-norms or, um, the coefficient shown up here, so we'll skip this, um, further. Um, um, right, maybe you should, uh, maybe I should, this depends on alpha here. OK, so that was that. And the difficult part is actually really on the second note. So the estimate of this one. And so that's actually new. So this one is basically a classic. So of course, for you it's new, but OK, so it's basically classical linear evolution, not theories. Classical theory, classical linear theory of evolution equations, differential equations. So function, space, value, differential equations. Now, of course, it's highly technical. You have to work a lot on this. But OK, so it's more or less, you could get everything from classical textbooks, OK, except for the norm here. But OK, so that can be done in some sense. Right. And so the difficult thing now is that because it was this rough video, I don't know what it is. Yeah, and so I promised to skip this most of the presentation. But I want to make one major point, how do you estimate those with respect to, for example, these kinds of C1 norms with respect to X. So that's the new estimate, and it comes down to the core of this rough-barth analysis, basically. So the main ingredient is the problem here. So if you fix alpha between one-third and one-half, then you can do the following. Yeah, so we have an object that looks like this one, p to the minus t, so we can reverse time, doesn't matter. So because, OK, so maybe I should mention this, so in contrast with stochastic integration, now martingale properties don't play any role anymore because these integrals are defined pathwise, right, so I can just here reverse the order in the rough path, the S-integration doesn't matter, doesn't change anything, so it's completely symmetric. So it can just right away slip time, going here from e to the minus t minus s to e to the minus t, for example. But actually, I don't need this, OK, it doesn't matter. Just look at this, I fixed one of those instruments, doesn't matter, but the other thing was also true. So that object looks like this. So then we have an abstract process, let's call it y, depending on this variable y. And as I've told you, so we fix the time in this outer integration. And let me integrate it into this one. OK? It's almost enough to know. And even worse, we need to control the C1 norm of this object. That means we need to take the relative respect to y, all right? And the main ingredient is that we can escalate this in terms of some constant C times t to power alpha minus 1. So that's integral with respect to t in 0, but still, so alpha of course is lower than 1. So this one will blow up as t goes to 0, but it's integral still. And then we can control this in terms of the certain alpha-Hölder norm of this process times the rough path metric or rough path norm of x. So, yeah, maybe I should go into this in terms of the x. Yeah, so I introduce this at work notation depending on the form. And that's actually uniformly with respect to x. So this depends on the spatial variable x. So this is something, you see, if you think of stochastic integration, you never get such estimates, right? You have a control now. You have a path-wise control. Remember, this is some kind of generalization of the eta integral. And then, of course, you cannot get any, let's say, omega-wise bound of an eta integral in terms of this, of the Brownian motion itself. But if you, as I just explained last week, look at the iterated integral and you get these quantified controls, right? And then, of course, if this one is convergent, that tells you that these integrals are converging and so on and so on in a very strong sense. That's the basic observation. So you have to observe and understand the continuity properties of this stochastic integral in terms of the integrant and the driver. That's the nature issue. Now, with respect to the stochastic integral with respect to the integrant, the continuity is trivial, right? So, if you have something like this, then we know that we can use, for example, the E to A3. And that was asked if the integral is converging with respect to the, how's that measure? It was also called the Föhrmann measure, but actually I introduced another notation. I forgot what. So, you know what kind of... So, we gave this a national name, which I forgot. So, if it converges, the integral is good to that and on, then it's because the integral is converging in the uniform. And here we have a much, much clearer and much better picture. In particular, also with a big driver. Yeah, okay. Yeah, then... Yeah, this estimate, basically... Yeah, what we get is, what is the basic idea? Well, basically, it looks like the Föhrmann object, Föhrmann expansion, so I have yet another process. I call it Zy now. It's basically the product of those, but that's the general argument now. And I can fix the S now. Yeah, so I have the rough point with respect to Y. Yeah, and so this is S, the very definition defined as a limit along partitions going to, the image size going to zero. I'm going to add these partial intervals in the partition. I add these intervals in the partition. And then, just by the very definition of this, this is X. Well, X minus X point Y. This is a little bit, let's say, inconvenient or new in the sense that we replace now the time by the spatial parameter. But, okay, so you can just think of this as time for the moment. It doesn't matter. And then, the major thing is that we also assume that this integrant itself is a rough path. Yeah, so we have also something, a second order object here to this one. Sorry, that's not quite correct what I'm saying, so it's not yet a rough path. So we have something which we would call some kind of derivative, some formal process. Yeah, and X, maybe I should skip this. And this stands for derivative, but you have to be careful, derivative is no longer well defined because the derivative of those processes don't exist. And then we have the rough path. Okay, so we have this kind of expansion. And, of course, I told you how to derive these formulas, so just from the further expansion of the Riemann sum. So that's essentially the same, only the new thing is now that we do not necessarily require that Z itself is differential. But the Z comes in a pair, and this one should serve as a derivative. The derivative is not uniquely determined. Everything here is only uniquely determined up to processes of bounded variation, actually. And we can add here something which is a bounded variation to this object. Then the limit will not change. This is the major thing. So it's the same thing that, for example, the quadratic variation of the C. So in that sense, the quadratic variation does not uniquely determine the C. So it just erases. And in that sense, this is also the same here with this derivative. Okay. So Z' is supposed to satisfy the following. So it's asymptotically in some senses. Uniquely in the sense that if you look at the remainder, yeah, the remainder of something like this. This remainder should be small in the sense that it should vanish in a certain metric. Namely in the, so basically what we can expect, we start with alpha-holder continuous paths. So we make a linear expansion, so we should expect that the rest and the remainder should be two alpha-holder. And eventually two alpha-holder is exactly what we want. The two alpha-holder norm of this process, as a process in xy, should be finite. Okay. So once again, I was a little bit, I said it wrong. So alpha is x, it's supposed to be alpha-holder. So this remainder will be two alpha-holder. And in particular, if we take now three alpha-holder, the rest will vanish. And actually we do the remainder estimates in the expansion in the three alpha-holder. Three alpha-holder is lower than one. Okay, so we have this kind of control. And yeah, this is called the so-called green element. Yeah, so it is a derivative that is basically with respect to another process, actually another rough process. Right? So we know, of course you should, no? So you know this kind of notation, this is a classical derivative with respect to x. But of course you could also introduce a derivative of f with respect to another function g. Yeah? So it is just defined to be the limit of f of x is h minus f of x divided by g of x. It's h minus g of x. It's just going to zero. And so in that sense this is the identity. This is the derivative with the identity function, you know? This is classical stuff. If f is differentiable and g is differentiable, then we make just basically all the quotient of the derivative. So it's not even difficult. You can make sense a lot of that if this is of bound and variation. If f and g are both of bound and variation, you can do something on this. And this one basically is a generalization. So that would be, in some sense, it's a derivative of z with respect to the process x. But both processes are not differentiable at all. Okay? So they are only differentiable in the sense that we have this remainder estimate, basically. Basically. Yeah? Okay. So we have this expansion. So this process should satisfy this on the Manga S-Node, or this expansion. And, yeah. So, yeah. Yeah, then you can prove certain continuity properties. And, um, and basically. Yeah, maybe I'll show it, like, um, they basically, um, present this in a shortcut. Well, basically you can now get some estimate of the following time, so this ansatz leads to the control of this integral in the alpha-Helder norm of the type, well, constants, and then you have the rough path matrix of x. I think this is just the Helder norm of x. Okay, so I should. This is only the alpha-Helder norm of the path x times the remainder. And the 2-alpha-Helder norm, and you see everything which I write down adds up to 3-alpha, and it converges in this limit. And then you have the Kubinelli derivative in the alpha-Helder norm times the secondary relation in the 2-alpha-Helder norm. So we have something like this. And that allows you to, well, you apply this now to this process here. And also with a corresponding derivative. So, yeah. And then you get something that, so ultimately leads to, I'm now skipping many, many, many, many things in the main. To the following estimate of this integral that we would like to have. And then this derivative with respect to, sorry, this is the derivative. This is a function with respect to x. The variable x over root would like to control the x. So with this one you can get the wrong formula control. I forgot the e to the minus times s. Maybe that's, I'm sure it doesn't play a further role. It only plays a role for the stationary solution and so on and so on. That was me. You skip the s dependence for the moment. L will be uniform with respect to s. L will be uniform with respect to s. And so, ah, no, we have even a bond. Pointwise bond. Okay, so we have something which is a heavy constant. We have a path norm to the power of 3, whatever, whatever. It doesn't matter. And the essential thing is, we have a certain growth in s. I skip that. But in particular, this is the major point. You see because the, ah, if you differentiate, ah, the heat kernel is back to x. Yeah, the heat kernel has this form. I skip the 2 pi here. So if you differentiate with respect to x, you get something which is, ah, of this form. Yeah. And, ah, you always need to think of, ah, integrating this up from, ah, s equal to 0 up to t. So in particular, you need to integrate over the singularity at t minus s equal to 0. And you see, this is still integral with respect to t minus s because it's the square root. But differentiating once, you get, ah, this one, the singularity to the power of 3 over 2. And that kills you. Right? So you cannot, ah, no longer, ah, integrate this. Of course, you can compensate this a little bit. Think of this as a Gaussian density. Then this is the mean of the Gaussian density. The Gaussian density, the mean is of the order square root of the variance, so square root of t minus s. But this still gives you something which is of the order 1 over t minus s. It's still diverged, not integral in t equal to s equal to 0. Right? It's logarithmically diverging. But we are already almost there. Right? So if you can get a little bit more, you can shift a little bit of this time, the repetitive, onto the other objects. Then we are done. Yeah? So this is the beta ratio here. And actually we can get around with the Holder continuity of the spatial processes here. And get some decay which is of the order alpha to the minus 1. So this is enough there. Okay? So we still make use of the Holder continuity of the underlying objects. So this allows us something which is, at the end, the integral of the physical fluid, the s from 0 to t. This is the essential thing. Yeah? We did all this work in order to get this bound. Yeah? Okay. Okay. Right. Yeah. And if you have this, you can control actually this object in the same norm. In the same norm as the first ingredient in the fixed-bought norm. So this leads to, again, many, many steps in between that curly to M2. That's a flat of V. Again, much, much constants here. We have this rough path dependence. But that is fixed. So there is not a problem. So we can allow any power here. And then basically what you integrate is the supremum over t, smaller than capital t, of basically this integrative. Right? So t minus x to the power alpha-hala minus 1, and 0 to t. But unfortunately, this is actually of the type, so this one can be estimated by t to the power alpha-hala minus 1. This is funny. Yeah? Are two simple constants, right? So, you know, so you divide by alpha-hala minus 1. And you see, now this is exactly what you need. Think of the Picard iteration. You want to have a strict fixed-point map. So you need to, basically, find a small t such that this will become smaller than 1, the whole thing. And that is, of course, duroly because this one and this alpha is pretty positive and then we are done. Okay. Whereas the other objects showing up here, they do not depend on this t. They blow up. They do not blow up, basically. Okay? Okay. Yeah. So, I skipped the rest. And so, not once more, until we have to prove, until the end of the proof. And you see, so this is basically part of rough path analysis. Now, let's say, this is already rough path 2.0. I mean, 1.0 was only denoted to rough paths as stochastic, as generalized or path-wise interpretation of stochastic integrals that I showed you. And now we have a random field, which is rough, right? So, this parameter, now it has to be a spatial parameter. So, we can basically compensate with these higher orderly expansions for missing derivatives of the objects, right? for the solution of ESPDE or something like that. And this can be developed further. So, for example, people in analysis took this up and looked at basically rough PDEs. Not rough stochastic PDEs, but rough PDEs. So, PDEs that are actually incorporating distribution of terms. Like, for example, this one, right? So, this doesn't make sense as a derivative to y, but okay. So, we can get a meaning here in rough path, setting more rough. It sends, let's say, enriching, basically, or adding higher order variation terms to these objects. Always, the idea is always the same, expanding Taylor expansions, right? My integrals are continuous summations. Maybe you have learned this somewhere, or I have read this somewhere. And basically, Riemann sums are actually stopping a linear approximation of a function. Intimate. And then you can go higher order terms. Okay. Yeah. So, the nice thing is that you can also look at smooth noise approximations. I will skip this, but this is an important issue. So, you see, we have now understood the continuity and the dependence of the solution to the driver. So, if the driver is converging in the rough path metric, so in this metric, then also all these objects will converge, and that is the corollary. So, basically, you can prove, for example, something like this. So, we can introduce a smooth noise approximation and consider the solution of the smooth noise approximation. We call it u epsilon. Epsilon is a parameter here. Now, this is exactly the same equation that we started with. And, well, on the previous issue, we had the space-time-wide noise, and now we can multiply the space-time, which is smooth, so q epsilon should be, for example, a convolution operator in this example. So, apply this to a function or the increment of the Vena process, spatial Vena process. So, this should be the spatial average. So, this is defined to be, if I take some BF segments, modifiers, and . So, this is a spatially smooth noise, so it's something that we would call a q-minar process, basically. If the epsilon is completely positive, then this function phi is smooth and x. If this is a direct sequence, then this would converge to the e of x, so this would converge to space-time-wide noise, in a certain, in a very, let's say, singular way in a distributional sense. And then, with this whole analysis, you can prove that the solution of this SPDE, so this could be a classical solution, classical in a sense could be solved within our framework that we had so far, a variation of context or not context. that this solution would converge as epsilon goes to zero to the solution of epsilon equal to zero, so to a space-centric solution. And this is done in a precise way. So, we have this kind of stability, and this is, of course, a very important thing, because it also tells you, you see, if you look, if you simulate those guys on a computer, basically you can only look at discretizations, with respect to time and with respect to space. And in particular, with respect to space, if you discretize your process, your minor process, with respect to x, then you are already in a smooth case, smooth noise case, ever. Yeah? No matter how you look at it. Because if you only fix your process at these nodes, then, of course, your computer doesn't know whether this comes from a singular, or a space somewhere noise, or from a smooth noise. You can always think of this as a projection of a smooth noise, as smooth as you like. Yeah? And that means that in the computing, it's dangerous. If you make simulations with discretizations, you actually cannot simulate the signal-driven SPDE, right? Driven by space somewhere noise. You know? That's not possible. And actually, before this theory came up, people were not able to basically control that in the numerical approximation, what they could see would be compared to increasing resolution, in some sense. Yeah? At least if you approximate space down by noise. If you approximate smooth noise, then it's okay. So then you can control this. Control means, okay, so you refine, and then you compare the solutions, the numerical solutions. And you refine, and then you see, observe convergence or not, basically. With a rate, which basically should come with the numerical parameter you insert here in the discretization, in the realization of your numerical approximations, right? And before this theory was there, there was no way to control this if you really go to a rough path, to space somewhere, sorry, to space somewhere noise. And actually, the other example that I wanted to show you was where they actually pinned this down in an example, a simple SPDE, where actually the limit that you get here depends on how you choose these discretizations. It really depends on, you know? And that was, I mean, people knew this, so we knew this a priori, but we were not able to make sense out of the fluctuations that we saw. So basically, the theory allows you to identify certain diverging terms here. Basically, then pin down on, basically, a consistent approximation theory, basically, convergence result. Okay, so, it's a really cool step. Unfortunately, we are not yet there in the applications that this becomes really relevant. At the moment, it's some kind of numerical academic exercise, basically. I'm sure this will show up sometimes in the future. But you see, physical noise doesn't care about this, let's say, sub-world correlation structure. Okay, so I would stop here. And I would then take two of your suggestions for the last, basically, two and a half lectures. So we started there with filtering and then, according to what you suggested, I will tell you a little bit on forecast-to-reaction fusion equations and Turing instabilities. So basically, I have uploaded a picture. Can I take this on the easiest course note? Three slides. I forgot about this. What slide you need? The other one, so there was another illustration. From the introduction, right? No, it's just from today. There should be a second... No, it's not there. Can you reload? Maybe? Ah, I see. Can you open this up? So you see, last minute, right? Can I take this? Yeah. So what you see there, if you open this up, you see some application of what we are actually now doing. So, on the left-hand side, you see a snapshot of a microscope, putting some, measuring some intracellular dynamics. But you see, let's say, a white phase and black, so two phase dynamics. It's called, right? It's called, right? So, these pillars, they correspond to some concentration of some substance, biochemical substance. It doesn't matter what it is and so on and so on. And the substance is actually moving in space and time. Yeah? So, you see one time snapshot here, but okay, so they, for example, they move forward or backward. So, there was some kind of... Sometimes they split up. So, for example, they build islands. Sometimes you see new islands showing up here and so on and so on. Basically, this is correlated to something, there's a social amoeba that is moving actually in time. And we see something in the intracellular dynamics of that social amoeba. For example, they follow some clinical gradients and it goes eating, right? It looks for something to eat. And so, this is basically something that you can measure. Actually, you cannot see this with bare eyes. You know, what you see is this is on the micrometer level, 10 to the minus 6. And, well, basically from the pure, let's say, mathematical object, what you see is a substance, let's call it U, and U at the point T and X is something which is actually giving us a certain value here. Let's say U is between 0 and 1. 0 stands for black, 1 for white. So, then this takes values between 0 and 1 somehow. And then we can set up basically a time evolution, right? And this time evolution actually is depending on, let's say, two mechanisms, actually a little bit more, but let's say, basically two mechanisms. One mechanism is, we have something that is diffusing, so we already know this heat equation, right? So heat equation means spreads out like heat, yeah? So, for example, it tries to average our local minimal minimal minimal streamer, right? And diffuses in time, so it has speed square root of t with respect to time t, as the variance of boundary motion is actually t, right? So the standard deviation is square root of t, so that's the diffusive scaling, basically. Okay, so this is one of the mechanisms, but if you only look at this one, then you see diffusion, yeah? What is diffusion? Well, it comes with something like this. It ends up like this, okay? So that's obviously not what we see. We see something which is, in order to get these so-called two-phase dynamics, we have something which is actually a local reaction. Local means local with respect to the spatial variable x. And I can get to this in a moment, okay? So this f typically looks like this. So the f could be something like this. So it has basically, so for example, if this is 1, this is a, it could be something like u times 1 minus u times u minus a. So it could be a third-order polynomial. What is essential here? So the a is actually between 0 and 1. The essential thing is the following. This guy has, if you look at the ODE, u prime is equal to f of u. Then the solution has two stable points, namely those and those, okay? They correspond to the dark side here, the dark spatial domain, where the solution takes value 0, and to the y one, to the region of high concentration, okay? But that's not the end of the story. So the solution of this ODE will either go to this stable or to this stable equilibrium point, no matter how we start, okay? So if you would look at this spatially without, so let's assume theta is equal to 0, then you would only see the spatial field of this ODE. And that solution would either go to 0 or 1. At the end you would see a black and a white face, and nothing more, any more in time. Can you imagine? Can you imagine? Okay. So that's a boring thing, and actually it's not what we want. Now we have diffusion, right? So if I have diffusion, what is the action of the diffusion on the solution of this ODE? Or on this PTE? What is the action of that? Or the impact, if you want. Let's look at this one dimensional domain. Now real line, so instead of spatial domain, just look at the same, you would look at this on the real line. Well, let's assume that we have a face which is equal to 1, initial profile, initial condition. There is somehow plus 1 here, this region, which is 0 here. Okay? So it's black here, and it's white there. Okay? And something in between. Something like this, it doesn't matter. It's black here. Okay? Now what is going on now? So if there would be no diffusion, basically this would stay as this. Here would be the A, and everything above the A would go to 1, and everything below the A would go to 0. So at the end, what would go there is something which looks like plus 1 here, and 0 here. Okay? So that's it. But now the diffusion comes at here. What does the diffusion do? The diffusion tries to average R, to local average R. So for example, it can lift here, at the close, where the initial profile is close to the A, the value A, it can lift the solution up across the level A. Yeah? Of course it also tries to pull this down. But one of those forces, shifting up or pulling down, actually is dominating the other one. So either, actually if A is not equal to 1 half. If A is not equal to 1 half, this is asymmetric. So there's a stronger force, I'm not quite sure in which direction now, so there's a stronger force in one of the two directions. Yeah? So either there's more force towards the one, or more force towards zero. Which means that at this wave front, at this level, one of those mechanisms actually dominating. So let's assume the one shifting to 1 is dominating, pushing up. That means that this guy here pulls up the solution. Yeah? And then if it's away from A, if it's well above A, we know what is going on, it goes to 1. Okay? So because you see, here the solution is already constant, diffusion doesn't make anything about it anymore. Right? Because, yeah, diffusion is just averaging out. So here's the constant solution, happens nothing. Okay? So it's pulling this out, so we have this kind of lifting, and so what we see is a traveling wave. So the wave front is moving from the left to the right. Okay? So you can simulate this very easy, it's very stable. If you take this, this is the so-called Nagumo equation, then you see this dynamics. Okay? Okay. So that's the basic mechanism that gives you so-called traveling wave solutions, the PDE. The next thing is, what we see are isolated solutions. Yeah? So what we need, we need another thing that takes care of putting this down again. Yeah? So there should be another force that forces this guy going down to zero. Okay? So that means that we need to basically, so this cannot be done with the scalar mechanism. So we need something more, we need a second variable, sometimes called inhibition, which basically pushes this down. Yeah? We can do this by integrating a V. So that's now another variable. If the V becomes large, basically it has a strong effect, yeah? A strong negative effect on the solution, so it pulls it down. And as soon as it pulls it below A, then the other mechanism is still dominating, so it goes down to the zero phase. Okay? So by that way, I can expect, if I have something like this, and the dynamics of A of V, of this second variable does the right thing, then I can look, I can hope for bump solutions. This is called a bump, and this bump is actually moving in time. So it's an isolated solution, right? Now in the spatial extension, exactly the same happens, and you get those dynamics basically, of these basically located phases that move in time, yeah? So, okay, so one possibility to write up here for the V is very simple. So you could, for example, take a linear equation. So there's some reason why I'm doing this here. Okay, so let's see, so this is basically going up as U is going up, so then it becomes large. This large one has a negative and inhibitory effect on the U, so it pulls it down where U was large, but with some, this epsilon smaller takes some time, because it takes time to go down, and so on, and so on, and so on. And after that time, so still this is actually going to zero. If the U is then going down, this is exponentially decaying also to zero, so the inhibition effect then actually is going away in time, right? So you have this here, no longer some kind of inhibition anymore, okay? Okay, so this is a system of, well, this is a partial differential equation, this is not a partial differential equation, this is an ordinary differential equation, but anyway, that's the simplest one you can think of. Now what we see, so if you would look at this one, you would still, you would already see something like this. What you don't see is, for example, that, for example, suddenly new waveforms show up or reverse direction. So what you can also see is that sometimes they move, for example, in that direction, but then suddenly they reverse the direction. Well, there's some reason to account for those effects and also for, well, I forgot about this, the wave speed of the traveling wave is actually deterministic. So if you look at this PDE, this travels with a constant speed along the axis, the speed is actually zero if A is equal to one half because of the symmetry, nothing happens anymore. But if it's asymmetric, you can compute the wave speed depending on the asymmetry of these two areas. And that would mean what we don't see, what you cannot model with this PDE or the system of PDEs that actually reverse the time, actually, and also time digits. So they are fluctuating, they move with, let's say, on average with constant wave speed, but the wave speed is actually random, so it's fluctuating. There is reason for that, why that is the case, it's well understood, what the origin of those fluctuations in the wave speed actually is. And then the question comes how to set up a mathematical model that can account for these fluctuations. Okay? And in secondary effects, for example, can be, let's say, can initiate reverse of all direction of movement and so on and so on. And the simplest way you can do is you add noise processes. Now you can add, maybe, once again, take this, so you can just add, for example, the spatial random processes. You can also add, if you're going to be forced on these two-phase dynamics, then if you choose that wisely, so you can basically replicate many of the features you see actually in the microscope. In the real motion. The second picture you see here is the numerical simulation. So what we did is we set up an SPD in certain noise terms and we tuned the parameter in such a way that the statistics, in some sense, is comparable with what you see in the microscope. So this was, I think, four years ago, we are now much more clever, we know now what is going on and it's a little bit different anyway. The approach is still true. OK, now we come to the filtering problem. You see, the microscope only measures from here. It doesn't measure V. And actually V is, in some cases, not even a physical observable. It's just a mathematical technique, a mathematical trick in order to produce those isolated dynamics. You see? Without that, you only see something like this. So you need something like an inhibition variable. So the microscope actually looks, so only measures U. And the name of the game, actually, it is to reconstruct UV. So it's also noise on it. That's the additional issue. So there's another noise term, which is zeta here, which I can notch. Everyone is excited and this is zeta. So this is zeta. So let's measure the noise. And the name of the game is now to reconstruct, so because to reconstruct the U, you need the V. So the name of the game is to reconstruct UV, so x actually, from something that actually only measures two. You see? And this is the point. Okay, and then we want to go further, because you see, as I already told you, this is basically a modeling question. Some of the parameters have some meaning by physicists, so we would laugh, but they are known. So we don't know, actually, the right-hand side of this equation. We make an ansatz. We make an ansatz of diffusion and local reaction. But how would those mechanisms actually look like, precisely, we don't know. So actually, the major task then at the end is also to infer also the parameters of the right-hand side from the data. That's the next issue. In some sense, we make here an assumption. We make the assumption that we use that we actually measure comes from such an expression. And we use it in the stochastic filtering algorithm. But that's not necessarily the case. Actually, it's wrong. You cannot believe. It's naive to think that nature follows this piece, let alone the noise. The noise, right? So the noise is also something that you don't know. So there's a lot of things to be done in order to, statistical tasks, in order to, let's say, validate such a model assumption. Okay? I can open it again. Sorry. Okay. Okay. Now, yeah, so I will talk a little bit about this guy in the last lecture, maybe. And we'll talk now about the problem of estimating the whole state from those noisy measurements. So here are two points, right? The first thing is, if there would be no measurement points, then we could take what we observe as for U, for random, because that's actually what we need. That's our definition of U. But as I told you, U doesn't explain the whole system. So we need something more to make this. Actually, this is the sort of Bacomian problem. Yeah? If you only observe this dynamics, then you cannot write down a different, partial different information. It's not Bacomian system because it relies on another variable which is actually not in the system. Yeah? In the description. So this is a non-Bacomian description of the dynamics of the unit. You see? To make it like a Markovian, we should also incorporate, as I told you, this second variable. And so that's another issue. Right? Even if the measurement error would be zero, this would still have a problem here of finding V for the Markovian dynamics. So the hidden variable. And this is basically the two ingredients in this estimation problem. Okay? And unfortunately, I told you last week the example of the target of an airplane or a moving object. If you move in time, then of course you can deduce from that acceleration and velocity. Because the system of the MGS1 is identifiable. But here it's not identifiable. No way. No way. Yeah? So you cannot infer from the subsequent positions in time view the variable V. No way. Okay? Right. So that's in fact independent information. Okay. Right. The final thing that I wanted to make is the general abstract statement on Bayesian estimation. Okay? So I think I already made the point. Actually, what alternative do we have? Probably that's the question at this point. Okay? Okay? Okay. Okay. Okay. Well, on an abstract level, on an abstract statistical level, I think there's a lot of things. Okay. Maybe we can take this question. Let's see. On the abstract level, you can set up your problem in the following way. So you would like to estimate the signal x. And then a measurement that is basically the function of the signal, the true signal, and some measurement error. Random variable. Okay? Okay. So you want to estimate y with an x. Okay? Okay. So if this guy has variance zero, so there is no measurement error, you can just try to invert this. So if you know y, you can solve for x. Okay? That's fine. I mean, it might not be possible, but okay, it could be. Okay? If the g is invertible, let's say. Okay. This is the so-called frequentist approach. So the frequentist approach of the statistician would just take the data and would use any kind of functional relation between x and y assumed, or let's say given one, in order to solve for the unknown. Okay? Of course, it's not so easy. The frequentist would also do the following. So if this would be, for example, linear, right? If you see something like this, and you see samples of this, of realizations of the signal, and noise realizations, what he does is, of course, a linear regression, right? So, you just take the average, and then you're done, right? So the empirical estimate would be, or basic, on double-hand samples, measurements, would be just taking the arithmetic mean, what else, right? So, just one of them, and then you see the samples. Now that's an efficient estimator, blah, blah, blah. Okay? So, this guy doesn't use any model assumptions. Yeah? It doesn't know, it doesn't use any a priori information on the functional relation, except the one that the measurement error is actually additive, right? The question is different. If you have a non-linear dependence between the signal and observation, then it's not so easy, right? Then you need to know more on the structure of g, and actually on the structure of how the distribution of measurement error actually is pushed forward by this non-linear energy. Anyway. Right. In general terms, you can also think of this as a stochastic process, a PDE. So, this is not only a scalar value, this could be also a process, it could be a PDE, an ODE, this could be an SPD or an SODE as well. And this could be anything, a functional of an SPD or an SODE, it doesn't matter. And we look at this in a minute. Right? So, the Bayesian approach now, the Bayesian approach, on the contrary, does the following. The Bayesian approach makes the structural assumptions. The Bayesian approach makes the structural assumptions. The Bayesian approach, on the contrary, does the following. The Bayesian approach makes the structural assumptions and makes an assumption on x. Actually, on the distribution of x. Okay? So, the Bayesian approach makes the structural assumptions and makes an assumption on x. Actually, on the distribution of x. Okay? Because it makes a model assumption like we made a model assumption here. So, the Bayesian approach, on the contrary, does the following. The Bayesian approach makes the structural assumptions and makes an assumption on x. Actually, on the distribution of x. Okay? Because it makes a model assumption like we made a model assumption here. Yeah? We make a PDE assumption and this PDE or this SPDE gives us a goal, a distribution, which is the prior distribution. And, so, we make an assumption. So, model x. So, we have a model for x. Model x. Model x. Model x t of a process for x itself. And, that yields the so-called prior distribution. So, the law of x with respect to some underlying probability space. And, the other assumption that the Bayesian approach makes is on the measurement error. So, the distribution. So, that's the first one. And, the second assumption is that you have something which is not the distribution of the measurement error. You know the distribution of the measurement error. And, in, basically, the statistical probabilistic terms, you would say, well, I make an assumption on the conditional distribution of the measurement error given the value x. So, if this is fixed, then I know the distribution of the measurement error. Which is being considered. And, one particular assumption would be, in terms of, to make an answer in this way, I write it in the exponential form to the minus curly L of x and y. And, y. Let's assume that the measurement error, as usual, takes values in some Euclidean space. And, this would be the Bayesian measure. And, this would be the density, the measurement density of the Bayesian measure. Okay? And, if you know this, then you know if you make the assumption on the signal, and you know this conditional probabilities, then you know the joint distribution of x and y. Yeah? And, the Bayesian approach, now, is to estimate, basically, the probability of x given the measurement y. So, the converse conditional probability. So, the probability of y of x given, actually, data y. So, that means y is my data. So, it's a realization of the observation with unknown x. And, I want to find the distribution of the unknown x, given the data y. Okay? And, by Bayes theory, you can just prove it, and you can just write down this window. So, this distribution is given, the area distribution, is given, I just write this measurement density in front of the prior distribution, and normalize it. Okay? And, there is this nice picture, which brings it to the point. So, I assume that you have a signal in spatial domain, and the prior distribution tells me, well, there are, let's say, four equal probable locations of the position of the signal. So, in this, this, this, this, this, and this. And, now, let's assume that my data is somewhere here. Well, nowhere is it? Yeah, maybe. I don't know. But, of course, it's not precise. So, it comes with a measurement error, which looks like that. Let's say, some Gaussian. And, this is the prior one. Yeah? With these concentrations here and here. Let's say, equally probable positions of the signal. That's the measurement density. And, now, the posterior distribution actually reweights those four positions. Let's say, this is more concentrated here. Then, the result of this operation, of this distribution, the posterior distribution, is actually, if I put this higher up. This one probably lower, because it's further away. And, those are somewhere in between. Okay? So, something like this. So, it does not exclude the possibility that, still, if I have an observation close to this point, there could be such a measurement error that, still, the signal would be there or there. But, the probability would be much, much lower. Then, actually, determine me that the probability actually is located here. That the signal actually came from there. Okay? Okay. So, this L is called the likelihood function or log likelihood function. Now, it tells me how likely the observation y, in the Bayesian context, it tells me how likely the observation y is if, actually, the signal is in the position x. Okay? And, it reshuffles, basically, it reweights the prior distribution, according to the likelihood function. And, this is what you actually see. Okay? Okay? Okay? Right. Now, we do this in stochastic deflection equations. So, as the signal, we consider an std. It's like something like this. And, assume everything you want, global lip shades, whatever, it doesn't matter. Okay? And, our measurement, now, is a continuous-in-time measurement. So, it's a process y, which sometimes is written in interval form. And, it's a, yeah, it somehow picks up the signal. It looks like this, under some, in general, non-linear transformation, that's some kind of the g. But, the measurement error is modelled by another broad motion. Okay? So, if you want to write this as a stochastic deflection equation, that's the usual way. If you specify the initial condition, that's the difference. Okay? You do not specify the initial condition here, because you don't know it. Yeah? You don't observe x. Okay. Okay. Um, the major assumption that we make is they are independent, these non-emotions. The observation is in a p-dimensional space, whereas the signals in a d-dimensional space, p should, need not be equal to d, that's essential. In practice, p is much, much lower than d. Now, um, let's look at the information that is, um, accumulated by the observation. So, that's just the signal, generated by this process. Okay? So, that's the information available up in t, right? Okay? Okay. Um, that's all, that's all we have, right? So, that's the data we have, the data stream. It's the information generated by the data. And what we want to do is, the best that we can do now, is in the optimal filter, where we look at the conditional distribution of x given y. Yeah? So, we somehow compute conditional expectations, distributions, whatever, of a signal giving this information that is provided by the data. Okay? So, so, compute, the problem is, compute, um, and compute is, of course, uh, not possible in general. Okay? So, approximate. Um, um, the conditional distribution, for example, the conditional probability that Xt, the signal at time t, is in the set A, given this data. Yeah? So, remember, think of the situation where we can come up with this one as a regular conditional distribution. So, if this, you can describe this guy as something which is a functional of this given data stream. And then, the goal is to compute this regular conditional distribution given the data stream Y. Okay? So, that's the major goal. Okay. Okay. Yeah? So, A, which is the goal of C. Right. And, um, I've already mentioned last week, and this is the last thing that I'm doing today, is now to actually give you a path-based representation of this guy. The only instrument, eh? But, it requires stochastic analysis. Really, stochastic analysis. Okay? Okay. So, uh, the, the result is the so-called kind of stochastic analysis. And that's now the entry point of the fundamental equations of stochastic filtering. We need some technical assumptions that are fulfilled in this setting. I do not mention that. And, in order to make the, um, it's, it's, it's, it's easy to mistake this fool learns. So, I will introduce a slight, I will use a slightly different formulation. So, I will do the following. So, I will take an independent copy of the signal. So, commitus means, it's an object that has the same distribution. No path of space. Okay? That's the stochastic process. And the additional assumption is, that this should be independent of everything else. Okay. Um, but, yeah, I'm, okay. So, since I am, it is better to rephrase this. So, y is a functional of, of x and the independent right motion. Yeah? So, v is independent of w, so that means v is also independent of x. Or, conversely, x is independent of v, because x is a functional of v. It's a strong solution. Um, so, just, uh, you could also, like I would say that, uh, and this is what we require, that is that, um, the independent copy is independent of x and y, but v, so v, not w. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Then we can write this additional distribution, or the conditional probability, in the following one. So, by definition, it is, uh, the conditional expectation of, uh, the, um, indicator function of, uh, x, d, and a. And, uh, uh, and, uh, the condition of the information that we accumulated so far. And, um, well, the Kalyama-Siegel formula now tells us something which looks similar like this one. So, we can represent this condition as a portion. The ratio of something that, uh, now takes the prior distribution of the signal. So, we integrate out. Now, here's something which looks like x bar, but not with respect to, uh, w, uh, with respect to, uh, w. Uh, with respect to v. So, this is a true observation. So, this, this means integration with respect to x bar only. Okay. And then, what is my likelihood function? Well, it's something which you know, because it comes from yourself. I will explain this term in a minute. I hope you need to know this. Okay. So, where this one means integration with respect to x bar only, not with respect to y or v. So, that is fixed. So, in that sense, this is the conditional expectation. And now, what is this likelihood function? Well, the likelihood function, in our case, is by, in the setting. Okay. Next, on that, I'll take this on. Maybe... This one, this one. No, the quadratic variation of this one. Okay, so how to prove this? I need to be a little bit careful. So I think in the lecture, I'm going to get the sum of the R, which will be identity. Take the identity and then, in general, the variance here of the Y is actually not identity, but R. So the quadratic variation of this is indeed R2 minus 1 the square of V2. Right. Okay, so how to do this? And that's the last argument that I'm doing here today. Well, so we know something. We have the prior one, we have the prior distribution because we know the law of the... Well, we don't know it, but we can write it down so we know what it means because we know that it's one solution of the SDE. So we know the XT basically. We don't know the precise position, but okay, we know the distribution. Understand the assumption. And what we also know is we know the conditional distribution of Y given X. Okay, maybe I'll write this down this way. So this is the conditional distribution of Y given X. What does that mean? It means I fix the realization of X. If I fix the realization of X, I get a Brownian motion with drift. You see this? So that means I can write down the law of Y as the sum of transform with respect to the law of V. So I know that the conditional law of Y given X is actually absolutely continuous with respect to the law of V, the Wiener measure. And the law is actually given by the Radon-Nicoline derivative. It's just the Gissanoff density. So it is just an exponential, but this is exactly the standard. But you need to be careful. X bar is now, sorry, this one is now our Brownian motion. So you basically substitute V for Y. That's exactly what you did. So we are given, yeah, I can, I can, well, it doesn't make sense, this is very good, it makes sense. So I take a realization of X, or X bar doesn't make sense. Maybe I should begin. Sorry. And this is just Gissanoff. which means, let me know this guy, or let's say, this one, right? We know the solution of Y and given X. Now we don't have a Lebesgue measure here, Lebesgue density, but this would be, you know, the Wiener measure. And this would be our Radon-Nicotine derivative over the sum of density. Okay? And now we know what we need to do. We need to just put this in there and compute it. You know? So basically we take the Radon-Nicotine derivative, write it against the law of X, which is X bar, and normalize it. And that's exactly, you see? I can make this rigorous, see, by, and I have done this rigorous, you can just follow the proof here in the, in the, in the, in the notes. And I've just put it down to the very detail. And you see, you know, going back to the definition, very definition of conditional expectations. The major issue that, you need to take care of is, that, there are two copies of X here, X bar and X. And what you need to, notice in the proof, is that, the independence of, of, of, X and B. Yeah. So the joint distribution of X and B is nothing else about the product. Yeah? The product of the distribution of X, not the distribution of B. Yeah? The product of the distribution of X, not the distribution of B. So this is a D plus P dimensional process. This is the law of the D dimensional copy and this is the one of the P dimensional. Okay? And they are really independent and this is used in the proof. And if you do this, then you get this. Okay? Okay. So that's, that's basically the major step, how to understand this formula. Yeah? So you need to understand this one, plus basically this one. And that's it. Okay? And it's rigorous. Everything here is rigorous. Yeah. Yeah. Maybe, maybe, maybe one, one final remark. And this I will do, continue next week. From that, you can derive, I mean, what the hell does it have to do with SPDEs? Well, you can now, use it to calculate this. the conditional distribution. So this guy, has a solution of some differential equation. And typically we start with this one. So we'll take this so-called unnormal mass, conditional distribution. We'll show you that in detail next week. Instead of a set A, I can use a test function. And this is just the definition. The integral of the test function against this, theta tilde T. And this is just the unnormalized conditional probability to be defined to be the expectation of f of x, t, x, t, x, x, x, x, x, x, x, x. Okay. And now you can write down if f is smooth, you know the cinematic head compositions of this one and this one. So you can write into scapulas in order to write a dynamic equation. Maybe I skip that. At this point I'll continue next week so we can write down. There you go. Just put up a new. Something on the right-hand side, take expectations, and then you get the so-called zaka equation, which is one of the first, which is the first sbde in a ss equation. Okay. So let's stop here and then I'll continue. Impressive. Very impressive. Yeah. Do you like it? Yes. Very interesting. But I feel like it's in a different language, like I'm completely missing vocabulary, you know. Now you feel like, when I sit in Tito's class, it's like... Yeah. Yeah. The last part is also relevant for the exam, I guess. And if you're willing to impress her, then you should tell him something about RELDA or SANSAKAR. About what? ALDA, RELDA, SANSAKAR. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay.

